this video is brought to you by ag1 as
the film industry moved away from
Suburban Perfection the extensive
efforts made by Hollywood to conceal
homosexuality in film during the
post-war lavender scare era began to
deteriorate and then Hollywood came to
realize that they were ignoring a large
audience
no not gays at the time the lifeblood of
Hollywood was relationship dramas Disney
and fleisure cartoons and biblical epics
however they ultimately realized that a
group of Americans with disposable
income but little to spend it on was
being excluded
teenagers who were incensed to fight
back against their parents conservative
confining outlook on life this
rebellious nature spawned arguably the
most famous adolescent dissident film
ever made Rebel Without a Cause the film
contained broad Illusions to alternative
sexual behavior and the Alternatives
offered by gang ritualism Plato played
by salminio is the Loneliest and most
troubled of the three problematic
adolescents in the film the other two
being James Dean and Natalie Wood
although he is not accused of it Plato
was raised by a domineering housekeeper
in the absence of his father which at
the time was considered fertile breeding
ground for homosexuality Plato is a
multi-faceted character who challenges
traditional gender and sexuality Norms
he's a sensitive and artistic young man
who admires James Dean's gym and aspires
to be like him their relationship is not
explicitly sexual but homoerotic tension
permeates it Plato's attraction to Jim
originates from his need for a mask role
model in his life who can offer him the
emotional support that he lacks at home
Jim is a troubled teenager who struggles
to blend in with his peers and family
nevertheless Jim's sensitivity and
emotional vulnerability contradict his
society's expectations of masculine
Behavior he is also drawn to Plato
despite being confined by the street
gang culture of the 1950s the writer of
the film Stuart stem said the gang in
Rebel Without a Cause isn't much
different from the Army both the rituals
are tribal the affection and gang
Behavior has to be hidden inside a
different vocabulary both spoken and
unspoken inside gestures and Words which
desensitized everything and made
everything brutal also they had to wear
skins to keep the image intact boots and
leather they had to put on a horse skin
in order to feel defended against the
discovery of their own Sensitivity I
don't know what other experiences in
World War II were but for us it was
deliberate and conscious
we were told that the buddy system
prevailed the choice of a buddy was as
or more critical than that of a bride
you'd be living in a kind of physical
intimacy which was unlike any other men
were having the experience of never
having been so close to other men and
there was something of that love
operating within the structure of the
teenage gang whose members had left home
where there wasn't much love
to fight each other in the streets
fighting may have been a pretext for
being close and Rebel Without a Cause
when Jim and Buzz another gang
Associated teen decided to enter a
chicken race to the edge of a cliff a
race in which buzz will die the two
regard each other for a moment and
question their participation in such an
event their encounter becomes the
motivation for all that follows Jim
refuses to deny his feelings and in the
screenplay stem uses the character's
guilt and grief over the death of Buzz
as a weapon against Conformity one of
the things I wanted to show in Rebel is
that underneath all the [ __ ] macho
defends there was that Pure Drive for
affection and didn't matter who the
recipient might be
there was a longer time in those days
for young men to be in that Warrior
phase where a lot of romantic
attachments were formed before
heterosexual encounters happened my
favorite moment in the film is not
between Jim and Plato but between Jim
and Buzz who dies in the chicken race it
was tender and loving and the killing of
that boy whom Jim had known for all of
12 minutes motivated the entire last
half of the film additionally Rebel
Without a Cause challenges the
conventional gender roles of women in
society as well Natalie Wood portrays
Judy Jim's girlfriend who struggles to
find her position in a man's world
Judy's relationship with Jim is
complicated because they struggle to
express their emotions to one another
however Judy's character is also
noteworthy because she challenges
conventional Notions of femininity she
opposes the role of the passive
submissive woman in favor of asserting
her autonomy and agency the release of
pent-up emotions due to this type of
emotional repression is what ultimately
kills buzz and Plato while Jim is secure
in Judy's arms clearly adult
responsibilities include settling down
in a heterosexual relationship contrary
to the illusions of your teenage years
homosexuality is deemed ignorable
until the end of adolescence after that
it's considered a sort of sign of
Arrested Development as we entered the
latter half of the 1950s and beginning
of the 1960s this appeared to be
Hollywood's perspective on homosexuality
as well theoretically gay characters
could exist in Hollywood films but only
with one of two conclusions either they
straighten themselves out or they die
and Hollywood was not hesitant to make
films expressing this to the audience
burying your gaze in media has existed
for much longer than Twitter and Tumblr
may think but before we dive into
Hollywood's exploration a forced queer
trauma and film which is
I'll admit not exactly healthy
let's hear a word from our sponsor which
actually is healthy this video is
brought to you by ag1 ag1 is
comprehensive daily nutrition Made
Simple the nutritional drink is made up
of 75 high quality Whole Food sourced
ingredients carefully curated to help
nourish your body with one drink by
replacing your multivitamin
multi-minerals pre and probiotics
immunity support supplements and more as
someone who's been on a ketogenic diet
for the last while it can be pretty hard
to get the vitamins and minerals I need
daily but with ag-1 I don't need to
worry about that now and not only does
it help make up for my dietary needs but
it helps a lot in places I never
expected I have more energy that lasts
throughout the day I've been more
focused which has been real helpful
considering how many videos we've been
putting out lately and I've been getting
better sleep
and it actually tastes good it's become
a regular part of my morning routine and
doesn't leave me with that energy crash
in the afternoon I always got when
drinking tea or coffee if you're ready
to simplify your own health and
nutrition tap my link in the description
to get a one-year supply of immune
supporting vitamin d3k2 and 5 travel
packs for free with your first purchase
[Music]
thank you
TN sympathy is a classic example of
repression through coercion the play and
film have become so emblematic of the
traditional remedy for homosexuality
securing the love of a decent woman in
the nick of time that people have
forgotten that it's actually a tale
about a timid heterosexual Robert
Anderson who adapted his own play for
the big screen in 1956 employs the
classic Outsider archetype of the man
who marches to the beat of a different
drummer and must endure the ridicule of
his peers in neither the film nor the
play as it ever suggested that the
sensitive student Tom Lee might prefer
men over women the issue at hand is the
allegation of homosexuality Lee's
classmates Call Him Sister boy because
like Jim from Rebel Without a Cause he
refuses to run with the pack Tom prefers
Bach to baseball and the companionship
of his housemaster's wife Laura to touch
football his male tormentors disregard
the fact that he is obviously in love
with the Elder woman because he does not
fit the stereotypical male role in the
Vincent film the majority of the
accusatory remarks about homosexuality
were toned down Thomas found swimming
nude with a teacher who is also
suspected of being gay in the play in
the film he's labeled queer because he's
discovered stitching a button onto his
shirt while lounging on the seashore
with a group of Faculty spouses the
suppressed homosexuality of Tom's
primary Tormentor the masculine
housemaster played by Leif Erickson who
married Laura to establish his
masculinity is also subdued in the film
adaptation Ericsson disregards Laura in
favor of the young male Macho pupils
that he instructs in Tea and Sympathy a
heterosexual youth is falsely accused of
homosexuality by adults whose sporting
activities provide the most homoerotic
action on screen Tom Blends in well as a
scapegoat Femme in the well-established
friendships between his classmates
therefore the film Advocates tolerance
not for sexual deviation but for
disadvantaged heterosexuals who are less
masculine never is homosexuality
considered a viable option for a genuine
man the message is that one cannot
presume a young man is homosexual solely
on the basis of his football performance
when Laura ultimately sleeps with Tom
she is not sparing him from a life of
sissiness but rather from his own fear
that his classmates may be correct about
his sexuality a fear that has already
led him to attempt suicide writer Robert
Anderson said to me it was never a play
about homosexuality when Leif Erickson
hounds Tom Lee he's really persecuting
what he fears in himself Tian sympathy
which again was not about homosexuality
nevertheless served as a lesson for a
generation of gay men who perceived Tom
Lee's tormentors pointed accusations not
as timid heterosexuals but as horrified
homosexuals the film was able to convey
a portion of what actual homosexuals
felt and experienced in the 1950s while
staying faithful to the cultural
imperative of invisibility cultural
necessity was of course in the hands of
the production code and there was never
any thought given to making the
homosexuality in NT and sympathy more
overt in the film even the prospect that
someone could be gay in reality was
eliminated prior to the commencement to
filming Deborah Kerr wrote to Vincent
Minnelli the Breen office is very
difficult about the homosexual angle
which is I understand their objection
adultery is okay impotence is okay but
perversion is their bet Noir in fact
adultery was not okay and so it came
under attack from the Catholic Legion of
decency anyway the already altered
ending of Tea and Sympathy had to be
made to reflect the necessary
retribution for Laura's affair with Tom
thus the finished movie taught that
instruction and initiation by an older
woman was a positive thing but that at
the same time such Behavior could not be
condoned at least not for the woman
Laura gives herself to Tom undoes the
top button of her blouse and says years
from now
when you talk about this
and you will
be kind
this is how the stage version concludes
the fall of the curtain left the
conclusion of the encounter to the
audience's imagination this however was
not good enough for Hollywood it filmed
the seduction scene with a subdued
reverence reminiscent of a church
service the way the scene was filmed in
the woods with the birds chirping and
the special lighting made it appear more
like the second coming of Christ than
the first coming of Tom Lee a glaring
epilogue provides the morally correct
conclusion that makes the preceding
material acceptable to the Legion of
decency at his class reunion 10 years
later Tom wears the largest gold wedding
band ever observed up close on film
Tennessee Williams stepped up to the
plate to provide what became yet another
comment on the foreign gay twice
previously Williams's plays were adapted
for the big screen with significant
homosexual references removed in each
instance the adapters asserted that the
homosexual aspects of the play were not
needed from a dramatic point of view in
1951 the pro problem that Blanche Dubois
encountered with her husband was omitted
from the film adaptation of A Streetcar
Named Desire in 1958 the homosexual
implications in the relationship between
brick and the deceased Skipper were
removed from Cat on a Hot Tin Roof in
both instances The Producers emphasized
that homosexuality was not the point and
was readily discarded in favor of more
acceptable explanations then in 1959 two
years before the production code was
actually revised to permit homosexual
subject matter on screen
Suddenly Last Summer dealt with the
subject as a psychosexual circus act as
the 1950s almost demanded the
homosexuality of Sebastian Venable
Williams's condemned poet could be
inferred but not shown if the Breen
office granted special permission as a
consequence of the combination of
insanity and cannibalism the film had an
unpleasant sickly Ambiance that made
everyone involved approach it with
caution Catherine Hepburn who portrayed
Violet Venable Sebastian's deranged
mother publicly conveyed her disdain for
the topic Ken Geist the biographer of
director Joseph Vanquis claims that
mankowitz and Spencer Tracy spent the
greater part of an evening in Boston
explaining homosexuality to Catherine
Hepburn
but she flatly refused to believe that
such people existed she need not have
made such a commotion over Suddenly Last
Summer though in a meeting with producer
Sam Spiegel and screenwriter Gore Vidal
the Breen office eliminated all
references to homosexual relationships
Gore Vidal said my script was perfectly
explicit
and then the Catholic Church struck the
Legion of decency after seeing that the
necessary Cuts were made gave the film a
special classification since the film
illustrates the horrors of such a
lifestyle it can be considered moral in
theme even though it deals with sexual
perversion it was resolved that
Sebastian Venable would not appear in
person in the film according to Vidal he
was destined to be a glimmer an occasion
for memory with this decision Hollywood
had accomplished the unthinkable
it has portrayed an invisible gay man on
screen in the film Elizabeth Taylor's
character Catherine recounts how she and
Sebastian spent their days in a Spanish
Hamlet on the seashore and discloses
that Sebastian used her to seduce young
men Sebastian's efforts were effective
due to the boy's desperation for cash
however when he began to make
preparations for his departure to
Northern Europe Sebastian and Catherine
were accosted by a group of youths
pleading for money on a scorching day
when Sebastian rebuffed their advances
they pursued him through the city
streets Sebastian attempted to flee but
the boys followed him wherever he went
in the meantime Catherine had been
feverishly attempting to catch up to
Sebastian but when she finally did she
found him surrounded by men
Catherine claims that they tore
Sebastian apart limb by limb
and ate him Henry Hart a film critic
discussed the origins of Suddenly Last
Summer in the January 1960 issue of
films in review it is said that
Tennessee Williams wrote Suddenly Last
Summer when a psychiatrist advised him
that for his own sake not to mention
societies he had better stop denigrating
normality and begin to expose the evils
of homosexuality and its Allied forms of
Vice this Williams did
regardless of whether the advice
actually came from a therapist
Williams's tormented depiction of a
flailing homosexual artist and the
individuals he victimizes with his
aberrant impulses is a classic horror
Tale the creature is finally destroyed
by an angry mob of Street Urchins in a
climax similar to that of James Wales
Frankenstein in which the peasants
pursue the monster to the top of a hill
where he is consumed by Flames what
emerged from Suddenly Last Summer was a
simple horror film with a budget a film
with a high moral tone that was
ultimately unable to investigate its own
subject but even the overt mention of
homosexuality in a film starring
Catherine Hepburn and Elizabeth Taylor
shook the foundations on which the
production codes aversion to
homosexuality stood the erosion of the
power of the production code to maintain
specific taboos had begun at the outset
of the 1950s and was only eroding
Evermore as time went on the California
state Supreme Court ruled in early 1959
after analyzing a case involving a
screening of Kenneth anger's fireworks
that homosexuality is older than Sodom
and Gomorrah and is a legitimate subject
for screen treatment if handled properly
the ruling overturned the conviction of
an exhibitor who had been fined 250 and
sentenced to three years probation for
displaying the film fireworks in 1957.
variety referred to fireworks as an
attempt to convey through impressionism
the homosexual outlook on life in
general and noted that the court opinion
stated that homosexuality is not to be
endorsed but Society must understand its
causes and effects after homosexuality
as a subject reached commercial film
houses seven years later Kenneth enger's
Scorpio Rising was eventually released
in theaters albeit specialized Art House
theaters such as New York's Bleaker
Street Cinema and caused a similar stir
once more the film was interpreted to
symbolize homosexual life and attitudes
in General Andrew Saras drew a
homophobic conclusion after viewing
Scorpio rising in the Village Voice and
observing that anger Compares a depraved
homosexual orgy to footage from an
ancient film about the Life of Christ
why the parallel with Christ what else
is there for attractive homosexuals over
the age of 30 besides crucifixion the
treatment of fireworks and Scorpio
Rising by the courts Distributors and
critics indicated how the code would
ultimately evolve even in enlightened
circles homophobia was far too pervade
and unchallenged for homosexual themed
films to be evaluated objectively based
solely on their cinematic Merit there
would be no recognition of the
legitimacy of gay subject matter only a
condescension to a an intermediate adult
audience Hollywood was determined to
reach without alienating the old fogies
Spartacus was one of the last commercial
films to have homosexuality expunged
from its script before the code was
amended in a scene between crassius and
his adolescent subordinate antoninus who
did not look like an adolescent the
elder man discreetly establishes his
preference for both men and women do you
eat oysters when I have the master do
you eat snails
no master do you consider the eating of
oysters to be modeled and the eating of
snails to be immoral
my taste includes
in both snails and oysters this exchange
was excised from the finished film
immediately followed by antoninus's
departure to join Spartacus and the
other slaves in Revolt what is therefore
lost is any indication of antoninus's
dread of having a homosexual
relationship with crassius the fear that
causes antoninus to flee at that time so
it just kind of comes out of nowhere
such omissions prompted producers and
writers in the film industry to lament
that the code restricted their artistic
freedom and prevented Hollywood films
from competing in the mature marketplace
with foreign films that dealt with such
subject matters openly at the beginning
of the 1960s the prohibition against sex
perversion was the only specific
restriction on subject matter still in
place for movie censorship the merch
company co-producers of William Wyler's
The Children's Hour launched a
meticulously orchestrated campaign in
the summer of 1961 to prepare the public
for the inevitable they disclosed that
Wyler's second adaptation of Lillian
Hellman's play would restore lesbian
implications to the story which had been
adapted in 1936 with all such references
glaringly absent in the film former
College classmates Martha Doby and Karen
Wright establish a private residential
school for girls in the early 1960s
Karen agrees on a wedding date with her
boyfriend a doctor Joe Carden after two
years of Engagement Joe is related to
the powerful Emilia Tilford whose
granddaughter Mary attends the school
Mary is a Pampered manipulative
adolescent who abuses her peers while
Mary is being disciplined for a lie she
told one of her companions overhears
Martha and her aunt Lily arguing Lily
accuses Martha of having an unnatural
relationship with Karen Mary shares this
information with her grandmother Mary
fails to convince others that she
personally witnessed Martha and Karen
interacting but compels Rosalie another
girl to confirm her story by using her
knowledge that Rosalie has stolen
jewelry and other personal items from a
number of people around the school tiny
little blackmailer Mrs Tilford is sued
for libel and slandered by the two women
but a few months later Martha and Karen
have lost the suit and are sequestered
at the school having lost all of their
pupils and suffering irreparable damage
to their reputations as a result of the
loss Karen breaks off her engagement
with Joe after he inquires as to whether
the rumors are true or not and Martha
explains that other female couples have
persevered despite being discovered due
to the intensity of their love and then
confesses that she actually is in love
with Karen and has been in love with her
for years
oh it's just as long as I can remember
but I never knew what it was until all
this happened Karen asserts that
Martha's sentiments are merely confused
but Martha insists that it's love while
breaking down into tears Mary's
deception regarding Martha and Karen is
exposed when Rosalie's mother discovers
the stolen items her daughter has
retained Mrs Tilford tells the judge who
then reverses the outcome of the
litigation and decides to publish
results in the newspaper and pay the
teachers a full Financial settlement
but everything has come too late
and Karen discovers that Martha has
hanged herself in her room
a year later the political drama film
advise in consent based on Alan drury's
Pulitzer prize-winning novel of the same
name was released the film examines the
intricate and frequently treacherous
world of politics in Washington DC where
a nomination for secretary of state
becomes the Battleground for personal
and political agendas while the film
predominantly focuses on political
Intrigue and Corruption the character of
Senator Anderson portrayed by Don Murray
discreetly investigates homosexual
themes young Utah senator Anderson is
designated chairperson of the committee
responsible for assessing the Secretary
of State nominee proposed by the
president as the confirmation hearings
continue Anderson begins to suspect that
the nominee May Harbor
communist sympathies which could
compromise National Security however
Anderson's personal life is scrutinized
when he is coerced by a former male
admirer who threatens to reveal their
past relationship
if Anderson does not withdraw his
opposition to the nomination the film's
portrayal of homosexuality is nuanced
but it emphasizes the personal and
professional dangers gay people
confronted in a society that was still
primarily antagonistic toward them at
the time Senator Anderson is portrayed
as a sympathetic figure who struggles
with the contradictions between his
private and public lives he is
conflicted between his responsibility as
a senator to safeguard the nation
and his desire to live an authentic
existence as a gay man the film
illustrates how his sexual orientation
could be used against him not only by
political adversaries but also by those
who sought to exploit his vulnerability
for personal gain in the end Anderson's
wife receives Anonymous phone messages
from a man warning that if the
subcommittee does not report favorably
on the nominee information about what
occurred between Anderson and Rey in
Hawaii will be made public an anxious
Anderson travels to New York to meet a
fellow Army veteran named Ray shaft
shaft confesses to selling evidence of a
previous gay relationship between the
two
leading
to Anderson suicide the film victim was
released the same year Melville Farr
played by Dirk Bogard appears to be a
successful London attorney in a loving
marriage but he conceals his sexual
orientation from everyone when his
ex-lover Barrett contacts him for
assistance in paying off some
blackmailers he disregards his requests
Barrett has stolen money from his
employers and has been apprehended by
law enforcement knowing that his sexual
orientation would soon be revealed he
commits suicide in his jail cell Farr
now plagued with remorse resolves to
take on the blackmailing organization
but each of the victims he approaches
refuses to assist preferring to pay the
money to keep their private lives hidden
knowing that Dirk Bogart himself lived
his life as a closeted gay man makes
victim all the more poignant from a
retrospective standpoint those who were
familiar with the industry at the time
claimed that his refusal to enter into a
marriage of convenience
hindered his prospects at a successful
career in Hollywood Hollywood continued
to produce similar Works throughout the
1960s and Beyond despite widespread
criticism of these and other films that
perpetuated the barrier gaze Trope
numerous lgbtq plus activists and
Advocates viewed the trend as evidence
of a hostile broader cultural and
political climate towards the community
as a whole they argue that the Trope
contributed to a culture of dread and
shame surrounding queer identities and
reinforced detrimental stereotypes of
queer individuals as ill immoral and
dangerous the practice however persisted
well into the New Millennium but there
was a faint glimmer of hope on the
horizon as the 60s came to a close with
the Stonewall uprisings ultimately
bringing the lives of gay people to the
attention of the general public and then
the gay inclusive x-rated Midnight
Cowboy won the Oscar for Best Picture
the Norms surrounding the depiction of
gay characters in film began to
disintegrate gay people could now exist
in Hollywood
but for how long
as we close out this episode I want to
thank all my patrons
it's only because of you that videos
like this are possible
YouTube isn't all too friendly when it
comes to pushing queer content let alone
historical queer content in fact in most
cases they try their best to keep it
hidden
so our amazing patrons are the reason
this channel keeps going
thank you all
so much your support
and getting to talk to you on the
patreon Discord it really means the
world to me
and if you'd like to become a part of
this seriously amazing Community you can
do so for as little as a dollar a month
at the link in the pin comment
all right now I'll let the credits roll
and I'll see you next month for
unrequited episode five
a crack in the closet
amen
foreign
[Music]
thank you
foreign
[Music]